15 Years of Free Software

by Richard M. Stallman

It is now just over 15 years since the beginning of the Free Software
Movement and the GNU Project. We have come a lang way.

In 1984, it was impossible to use a modern computer without installing
a proprietary operating system, which you would have to obtain under a
restrictive license. No one was allowed to share software freely with
fellow computer users, and hardly anyone could change software to fit
his or her own needs. The owners of software had erected walls to
divide us from each other.

The GNU Project was founded to change all that. Its first goal: to
develop a Unix-compatible portable operating system that would be 100%
free software. Not 95% free, not 99.5%, but 100%—so that users would
be free to redistribute the whole system, and free to change and
contribute to any part of it. The name of the system, GNU, is a
recursive acronym meaning “GNU's Not Unix”—a way of paying tribute to
Unix, while at the same time saying that GNU is something
different. Technically, GNU is like Unix. But unlike Unix, GNU gives
its users freedom.

It took many years of work, by hundreds of programmers, to develop
this operating system. Some were paid by the Free Software Foundation
and by free software companies; most were volunteers. A few have
become famous; most are known mainly within their profession, by other
hackers who use or work on their code. All together have helped to
liberate the potential of the computer network for all humanity.

In ????, the last major essential component of a Unix-like system was
developed: Linux, the free kernel written by Linus Torvalds. Today,
the combination of GNU and Linux is used by millions of people around
the world, and its popularity is growing. This month, we announced
release 1.0 of GNOME, the GNU graphical desktop, which we hope will
make the GNU/Linux system as easy to use as any other operating
system.

But our freedom is not permanently assured. The world does not stand
still, and we cannot count on having freedom five years from now, just
because we have it today. Free software faces difficult challenges and
dangers. It will take determined efforts to preserve our freedom, just
as it took to obtain freedom in the first place. Meanwhile, the
operating system is just the beginning—now we need to add free
applications to handle the whole range of jobs that users want to do.

In future columns, I will be writing about the specific challenges
facing the free software community, and other issues affecting freedom
for computer users, as well as developments affecting the GNU/Linux
operating system.
